[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>FRANK DE LUCA: I really
had to go back to zero
and say, now, why would I
talk about the Enneagram?
I drank the Kool-Aid
a long time ago.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Right.
>>FRANK: But not everybody has.
If they had this language, if
they had this point of view,
oh, it would just
be so much more fun.
We have a, kind of,
contracted self--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: --and an expanded self.
>>REGINA: Very well put.
>>FRANK: They keep longing
for that perfect other
who will see me in my depth.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
I did not know the
rude cashier's son was
expelled from school yesterday.
I did not know the
careless driver
who pulled in front
of me just got word
that his wife was in the ICU.
I do know that erring
on the side of kindness
never hurt a soul.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think all of us
enjoy seeing ourselves
and others through the lens
of different assessment tools
or archetypes.
One such tool is the Enneagram,
which I find to be very useful.
Frank Deluca began using
the Enneagram decades ago
for creating more
positive relationship
in his personal and work life.
As the years went on, he
began taking this knowledge
and distilling
it, until he found
the perfect essential you.
His book, "A Field
Guide to Humans:
Using the Enneagram to
Improve Your Relationships,"
is this distillation,
replete with beautiful art
and personal stories.
And I have to tell you, Frank.
I've been telling everyone,
you got to get a bunch of these
as gifts for people
because you did
something different
with this book
than what I've seen before.
Enneagram books are fun.
But a, you've made
it into an art piece.
But even more
importantly, you actually
did take your, what, 30,
40 years of knowledge
and distill each
of the archetypes.
So you can recognize yourself
in this wonderful little book.
Thank you.
>>FRANK: Thank you for noticing.
>>REGINA: Well, you put
a lot of work into it.
>>FRANK: I did.
>>REGINA: Isn't it glad
somebody noticed, huh--
>>FRANK: Right, exactly, sure.
>>REGINA: --because
you need a publisher.
>>FRANK: Yeah, it's true.
>>REGINA: So with you,
first of all, this is--
some people know about
the Enneagram, some don't.
I don't think I've done anything
on the Enneagram for years.
So first of all, let's
talk about the history
of the Enneagram a bit itself.
And then we're going to
start going into your history
with the Enneagram.
>>FRANK: OK, sure.
The Enneagram as a symbol has--
we don't know how
long it's been around.
Some attribute it to
Pythagoras and sacred geometry.
Others think it kind of
came in the Middle Ages
with a confluence of mysticism,
Christian mysticism, Judaic,
and Islamic.
But we don't really know.
We don't have facts
about that symbol.
What we do know is
that in the 19--
about 1915, 1920, a man, a
teacher, mystic, Gurdjieff--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: --presented
this to his students.
But he didn't talk about
it in terms of personality.
He talked about it in
terms of the movements
of the energy of life.
And that it's kind of the--
I kind of look at it
as a map of the cosmos.
And you can read a lot into it.
So he didn't teach the
Enneagram of personality.
But he talked about chief
features in each one.
And he taught, actually,
through movement.
And there were dances that
went with the Enneagram.
You move ahead to the late 60's.
And a Bolivian man
in South America,
another kind of mystic teacher,
began to teach in his teachings
with the Enneagram.
And he began to add
personality called
ego fixations on top of it.
And he used it as
part of his program
for spiritual development
and enlightenment.
In about, I think, 1970, a
man named Claudio Naranjo,
he was from South America.
But he was working
in the United States.
He was a psychiatrist.
And he was also very interested
in personality systems
and psychometrics--
a lot of other things.
He went to South America kind
of on a personal journey.
And he spent time
with Oscar Ichazo.
And he was introduced
to the Enneagram
as Oscar was working with it.
When he came back to the
United States, that's
when things really
began, I think, as far
as our understanding of what
we have as the Enneagram today.
It's kind of the Big
Bang of the Enneagram,
in that what came
together was these kind
of mystical teachings,
with his understanding
of modern psychology
and personality systems.
So he began to do
the blending of--
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>FRANK: --spirituality,
mysticism, and psychology.
>>REGINA: And that's
really what you were
interested in professionally.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: So now let's
go to you and talk
about you professionally, and
how you intersected with it.
>>FRANK: So the--
it was like, 1989.
Things happened in strange ways.
But someone gave me a book
called "The Enneagram."
It was by Helen Palmer.
And this is interesting.
But I didn't quite,
couldn't quite, absorb it.
But shortly after that, I was
on a retreat, a 10-day retreat.
And the person
who was running it
had just done training
in the Enneagram.
And she had a colleague.
And she said to the
colleague, because I
was going to work
with this woman,
would you please type Frank?
And I didn't know
what this was about.
And she came away saying,
I think he's a type I.
And my friend said, oh no.
That was the first response.
>>REGINA: Right, oh no.
>>FRANK: But what happened
is that I began to study.
And I began--
I made friends with this woman,
who was a trained teacher.
And as I began my training
and as a therapist
and seeing clients, I
would consult with her
from the Enneagram
point of view.
What do you think
this person might be?
And I was doing
consulting with companies.
And I would bring her in to
help me understand these people.
And they would work with her.
So I was able to watch
and learn from her.
And I just kept doing more
study and more learning.
And I'd had private
practice as a therapist.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And as I sat
there with people,
I thought, oh, if
they only knew this.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah, yeah,
>>FRANK: It would speed
things up just greatly.
>>REGINA: So you
start blending it?
>>FRANK: So I said,
well, I got to--
I'm going to have to teach this.
And I began to teach,
I guess, in 2007, just
to clients, only certain clients
who I felt would be open to it.
And that began to spread.
But still, I was interested
in family and friends
knowing this truthfully because
it would make my life easier,
is what I thought.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: If they had
this language, if they
had this point of view,
oh, we could just--
it would just be
so much more fun.
And truthfully, that's what
I love about it the most.
There's so much joy that comes--
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>FRANK: --of not being
locked in to these patterns.
>>REGINA: I agree,
especially if you
can come from the
understanding, every one of us
is making decisions and looking
through a lens of life that
is unique and different
from the other.
And we're making an assumption
that someone kind of
understands life through a
similar lens as ourselves.
That's not true at all.
>>FRANK: It's not.
>>REGINA: All you have to do
is get married or whatever.
And you'll find
that out, you know?
>>FRANK: Yeah, well
there's where it really
shows up, in relationships.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And we recognize
that, oh my god,
you really have a whole
different take on things,
don't you?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: Yes, and when we see
people with a different take,
we assume there's
something wrong with them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: Because don't you
know, this is the way it is?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And they say, no.
>>REGINA: That's not
how I see it at all.
>>FRANK: That's not
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: So it really
is about perception.
>>REGINA: Yes, you and I talked
about this before, off camera,
before we prepared for this.
And we were talking about
how it allows a person
to set up your relationships
with others really based
on compassion and understanding.
>>FRANK: Yes, that's one of the
great gifts of these teachings.
I don't know anything
that has allowed me
and people I know to
develop our compassion.
And I really emphasize
in my book, kindness.
>>REGINA: Yes, you do.
In fact, I've written something
down here from your book.
>>FRANK: Yeah,
because I had to say--
I mean, the Enneagram is
one of the tools I have.
But I've been studying
things for the last 40 years
in teaching, kind of from
the human potential movement,
and so forth.
And when I wrote this book, I
really had to go back to zero
and say, now, why would I
talk about the Enneagram?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: I drank the
Kool-Aid a long time ago.
But not everybody has.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>FRANK: So why the
Enneagram, why self awareness?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: What is this all about?
And I kind of came to see
that if we can't be kinder
to one another, then does all
of our consciousness work really
matter?
>>REGINA: No, it doesn't.
So if you don't mind my reading,
this first page in the book,
it says, "I did not know
the rude cashier's son was
expelled from school yesterday.
I did not know the
careless driver
who pulled in front
of me just got word
that his wife was in the ICU.
I did not know that
my sarcastic remark
had hurt my friend so deeply.
I do know that I easily
forget how tender we all are.
I do know that erring
on the side of kindness
never hurt a soul.
And that was beautiful."
>>FRANK: Yeah, that was--
yeah, I use poetry in
the book, as you know.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: Because to
describe types is one thing.
But I wanted to find other
ways, other channels.
And so the artwork, the colors--
>>REGINA: Yes, beautiful.
>>FRANK: --the
poetry, not all of us
have linear minds
that we use only.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And so the poetry--
and I'm aiming for
the heart there.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: Because you asked
about differences earlier.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And I've come to
see, we really can't resolve
many differences mentally.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: It can only really
be resolved through the heart.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: Where we become human--
>>REGINA: That is so true.
>>FRANK: --with another human.
>>REGINA: In fact,
I even tried using
the Enneagram with someone
who's totally in the head.
It didn't work at all because
the same defensiveness and all
that kind of remained
that was there
to begin with because
if you can't drop just
into the vulnerability of
your heart, and say, look,
we're just different.
Can we look at those
differences and how
they might work together?
So you have to be brave
enough and vulnerable enough
to allow yourself to be
that honest with yourself,
and each other.
>>FRANK: Yes, it's not
for the faint of heart.
>>REGINA: It's not
because a lot of people
don't want to know that there's
a significant difference there
that probably isn't
going to be bridged.
But that doesn't mean it's
the end of the dialogue
or the relationship.
It doesn't mean
it's the end of it.
But it's the
elephant in the room
that you just haven't been
willing to talk about, right?
>>FRANK: Well, it is.
And what's great is that
the Enneagram gives you
a impersonal way to talk
about something personal.
>>REGINA: Exactly,
exactly, that's
what's so beautiful about it.
>>FRANK: It is, it is.
>>REGINA: So I agree with what
you said in the very beginning,
and what we talked
about off camera.
If there was ever a
time in the world,
right now is the
time where we need
to start understanding
each other better
because we have
such polarization.
People are so siloed.
People are so defensive
and judgmental
and hurt right now at large.
And that's everything in the
media, is reinforcing that.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: So that's why
when I read this book,
I thought, yay, this is so
accessible and so pretty.
So the combination of the
aesthetics and the usefulness
is-- that's my sweet spot.
>>FRANK: Well, that's
what I was aiming for.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you did it.
>>FRANK: The aesthetics
will communicate something.
>>REGINA: So I know this is
going to bore you to death.
However, we're all looking for
something of ourselves in here.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so if
you would indulge me.
And let's go through the types
in the most essential truth.
So each person can start seeing
themselves in this story.
So when we talk about
pairings and such--
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --they can
kind of read themselves
into the story a bit.
>>FRANK: Sure.
>>REGINA: So--
>>FRANK: I'll do my best.
>>REGINA: --you're a 1?
>>FRANK: I am.
>>REGINA: OK, so there you go.
You're admitting to it, OK.
Yes, so let's talk about the
essence of the 1's of the world
because there are nine types.
>>FRANK: Right.
>>REGINA: So there's
a lot of you.
There are a lot of 1's.
>>FRANK: Yes, there are
not enough, probably.
>>REGINA: If you do say so.
>>FRANK: Well, oh, 1's--
you see, what I
like to look for is
what's at the heart
of the 1's, and then
what happens because each
type has particular strength.
And they do that over and
over, use that strength.
But that strength
becomes overdone.
The strength for a 1 is
to have a basic sense
of what's right and wrong,
a highly moral development,
a sense of how things
should be in the world,
and a sense that we
could all get along.
And improvement is
really essential to a 1.
Now, you can imagine
living with the one, then.
>>REGINA: Yes because
everybody's got to improve,
not just the 1's,
everybody else.
>>FRANK: That's right.
My partner, I tell him, look,
there is a special place
in heaven for partners of 1's.
>>REGINA: Of 1's?
>>FRANK: Because
everything is constantly
an improvement project.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: Myself to start.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: So I can never quite
match up to the expectation.
Basically, 1's
have a sense of how
things could be and should be.
And there's how things are.
And the gap creates
resentment and irritation.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: So 1's
aren't openly angry.
But they're kind of, under
the surface, like, irritated--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: --all the time.
>>REGINA: And so does that
sense also become the downfall,
the very thing that
is their strength,
which is to have
this moral compass--
>>FRANK: Right.
>>REGINA: --this innate
knowing of right and wrong.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It also can
become very judgmental.
>>FRANK: We can be heavy-handed
with it, I will admit.
The Inquisition-- it's
like, there's a sense of,
punish those.
I mean, that's the extreme.
What I have to say
about each type
is that people talk about
levels of development.
I kind of look at as
a little more simple,
to say we have a kind
of contracted self--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: --and an
expanded itself.
>>REGINA: Very well put.
>>FRANK: And so
the contracted one
is angry, and wanted
to punish people
for doing things wrong,
mostly in the mind.
You don't have to
always express it.
But it's an inner dialogue.
>>REGINA: It's there.
>>FRANK: It's there.
The more expansive
one is, what can we
do to bring better
life to people?
And how can--
>>REGINA: Improve things.
>>FRANK: --I be generous.
And how can I improve?
But how can I come from
my heart when I do it.
And that's a big--
I think for every type,
that's where it really
begins to shift.
>>REGINA: And we're going to
look at that in each type.
So where would a 1 best
be placed in the world of,
if you're offering your
gifts to the world,
whether it's through career,
or a family, or volunteer
friendship, where do they shine?
Where are they best situated?
>>FRANK: We're
really good teachers.
>>REGINA: OK, I bet, yeah.
>>FRANK: We like to help
people find the way, you know?
So teaching, things that
require-- and it depends.
We could say there's
a wing, which
means the type next to us, which
is the 2, in my case, which
means I would like to really
help people through teaching.
I would like to see
people get better.
And so 1's are, they're just--
anything that gives them
a chance to organize.
I mean, 1's can organize.
You put anything
in front of a 1,
they can usually organize it.
>>REGINA: I need to find a 1.
>>FRANK: They'll just
clear out everything--
not so much that they're
neat, but it kind of
is a sense that there's
a place for things.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>FRANK: And that
means physical things.
It means mental things.
It means everything-- there's
a place for everything.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And some 1's are
really good with that, yeah.
>>REGINA: So for a 1, if you're
looking at a client, and--
have you seen, in your
clients over the years,
that there is a preponderance
of people who have a propensity
toward teaching, or art
teachers who are 1's?
Or are most people not
living their truth?
>>FRANK: Well, it
doesn't mean that they
fall into certain
occupations better.
But wherever they go,
that preoccupation
is there with them.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>FRANK: And so yes,
I have seen 1's--
I've seen 1's working in
finance, and making sure things
are exact.
I've seen 1's working
in a lot of fields.
But you can always
usually spot a 1
by understanding they're
very critical of themselves.
And so they often can be
critical of other people
without really knowing
they project a lot.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: But it could
be any occupation.
I can't say I've really
seen one occupation.
>>REGINA: Well, that's why I
was just wondering if 1-- like,
I'm going to ask
this at the end.
What happens when you're
living your not true self?
And we'll talk about
that a little later
when we get done with the
archetypes, if I remember.
>>FRANK: OK.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's go
through to the number two,
then.
>>FRANK: OK, 2's are
focused on others
and being helpful to others.
And they would like to know
that what they do counts,
and that people will acknowledge
them for what they do.
So it gets tricky
because again, strength.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Here I am.
I'm helping you.
Other side might
feel like, enough.
>>REGINA: I've helped.
And no one's honoring,
or respecting,
or even noticing me.
>>FRANK: And they can
flip over into anger--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: --and not
being appreciated.
And 2's, when they're really
in their expanded self,
are just the most loving,
wonderful people because they
can anticipate your needs.
They know before you
say or do anything.
They're watching.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And they're attuned
to the emotional life.
I didn't say this.
But we're in the-- called
the feeling center,
2's, 3's, and 4's.
And so 2's are very
attuned to emotions,
mostly other people's, though.
And they're trying
to encourage people
to have positive emotions.
They're the first cheerleaders.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: They're, you
can do it, great support
people in that way.
What they're not so
good at is understanding
their own feelings
and their own needs.
And it becomes kind
of a prideful thing,
that I know what you need.
And for it to-- to turn
it around, I'm fine.
>>REGINA: I'm fine.
I don't need anything.
>>FRANK: Like I said, the
kind of classic thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah, so might
you find caregivers
in this category?
>>FRANK: Often caregivers.
I have found also that women
sometimes over-type themselves
in 2.
>>REGINA: Yes, I think so.
>>FRANK: Because of their role
as mothers, or just in life.
And they just kind
of take on that--
>>REGINA: Even though
they're not a natural 2.
>>FRANK: Right.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Right, so I always,
if people tell me they're a 2
if they're women, I
kind of usually check it
a little bit further to see.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: But yes, it could
be certainly nurturing
roles: nurses, teachers,
again, in this case.
But they could be in
corporate America as well.
>>REGINA: Sure, sure, anywhere.
>>FRANK: But
they're focused on--
>>REGINA: Others and
the needs of others
>>FRANK: --others.
>>REGINA: So it's
really important for us,
if we see someone in our
life who is like that,
to respect and honor
them for what they give.
>>FRANK: Appreciate them.
>>REGINA: Appreciate them.
>>FRANK: And express
appreciation--
>>REGINA: Express appreciation.
>>FRANK: --help
get you a long way.
>>REGINA: A long--
OK, these are good.
That's why I wanted to get
through the types individually.
So we can learn how to be
with each other better.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, so number 3's.
>>FRANK: 3's are often
called achievers.
And I kind of think of them
as, like, thoroughbred horses.
And out of the gate,
they go for the goal.
They're going to win the race.
They don't have-- that's
all they can think about,
is where they're going.
They don't think about
even how to get there.
They just move.
They're good
strategists though, too.
If you put something in
front of a 3 and say,
here's where you
want to be, they
will figure out the
way to get there.
So they're very
focused on tasks,
very focused on goals, very
focused on accomplishments.
They identify so much with
that, that what happens
is that they forget
about anything
else in life except that.
And so feelings-- feelings
kind of get in the way for 3's.
It's like, it'll slow me
down if I take time to feel.
And if someone wants to come and
share their feelings with me,
oh really?
>>REGINA: Do we have to?
>>FRANK: We have a lot to do.
And so I've learned, and I
kind of put it in the book,
I think, if you're around
3's, don't express feelings
to them unless they really
asked for something like that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: Because it's
not that they don't care.
It's just that they're focused
on task and moving ahead.
And so now, our country
is mostly a 3 country.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: It's kind
of a 3, 1 country.
It's kind of funny.
But we really value
people who are
self-made people, people
who will accomplish things
over all odds.
We'll fight.
And we'll compete.
3's are very competitive.
And so it's a wonderful skill
to have, but again, overdone.
Relationships can
get really difficult.
>>REGINA: Well, I was just
going to bring that up.
So you must feel kind of run
over or overlooked, oftentimes,
if you're in
companionship with a 3.
>>FRANK: Yes, often, 3's
will be so focused on--
and it's not just career,
but their image of success.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: So 3's are
very image-oriented.
And it's not only
that I do good things,
but people are
seeing me do that.
So if you are in
partnership with a 3,
they're going to want to
make sure you look good.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: And they'll make
sure that you show well.
>>REGINA: Everybody's got
to look good, show well.
So for women, you might
be an arm ornament to a 3.
>>FRANK: It could be.
>>REGINA: Oh, I think I've been
in that role a couple times.
>>FRANK: Right, yeah.
But the beautiful part of
3's is that they're just
so good at knowing
how to do things.
They have a sense of competence,
oftentimes, and just the sense
of being able to do.
And I always-- because as a
1, I might overthink things.
3's don't generally overthink.
They kind of go,
here's the decision.
Here's what we're going to do.
Done, next.
And it's very simple to
be with them in that way.
>>REGINA: So it actually
makes people around them,
especially in work
or even family,
kind of feel comfortable that
they know what they're doing.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, so you can kind
of relax and say, he's got it.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: Or she's got it, yeah.
>>FRANK: Now, they only--
they will only focus on things
that matter to them usually.
>>REGINA: Right, yeah, right.
>>FRANK: So there's
that part of it.
But yes, and so I
have found myself--
I have in the book, I
think, a 6 working for a 3.
And the 6 can get a good sense
of confidence from the 3.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: Because they're moving.
>>REGINA: Yes, OK, number 4.
>>FRANK: OK, number
4, it's often
called a tragic romantic, which
is in a way, a terrible name.
But 4's-- we talked about
2's being focused on other
people's feelings.
And 3 is kind of saying,
do we really have to?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And 4 is saying,
that's life, deep feelings--
not necessarily happy
feelings-- sad, any of them--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: --matter.
And they're kind of,
really, I would call them
the deep divers in the world
of emotions and feelings.
They're very comfortable.
They're very comfortable
in tragic situations, or--
I know of, I think, four 4's
who are all grief counselors
and have written on this.
And they're wonderful
at supporting people
through these difficult times
because to them, it's rich.
And what I've learned to
appreciate about 4's is
the richness that they carry.
And they focus on authenticity,
focus on things being real,
people being real with them.
You don't want to mess around
with a 4, try to be phony.
They will spot it.
And they will
often let you know.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Be very forthright.
And I found, at times, kind of
being intimidated around 4's
because they can be
really present with you.
And you kind of feel
like if you're fudging,
or if you're not
being authentic,
they're going to feel it.
Now, they can go overboard too,
where all of life is feeling.
And it's about their feelings.
And so we all have to stop
and listen to your feelings.
>>REGINA: Your
perceptions and feelings.
>>FRANK: Your perceptions.
And they can kind of get
seduced by their own feelings,
meaning that they
get hypnotized.
>>REGINA: They get full
of themselves a bit, yeah.
>>FRANK: They're very--
I had a 4 client for
a number of years.
When she came to
me, she had gone
through a very unhappy divorce.
It wasn't something
she really wanted.
She had lost a very,
very close friend.
She had lost her career and
was starting over again.
She was just really-- so she
cried the first six months.
And I don't-- that's not unusual
for a 4 to experience losses.
And that's one
thing about 4's, is
that they are very attuned
to loss, and then the desire
to find a way to fulfill that
sense of emptiness and loss.
And that can be-- that's why
sometimes it's tragic romance.
They keep longing for
that perfect other,
that perfect person
who will get me,
who will see me in my depth.
>>REGINA: Oh yeah?
>>FRANK: Uh-oh-- and be
able to meet me there.
And they're often
frustrated because--
>>REGINA: Because
you can't find it.
>>FRANK: You can't find it.
>>REGINA: That's not possible,
to get it from another.
>>FRANK: And so
they'll dismiss people.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: It's like, OK,
I thought you were it.
But you're not.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
yeah, OK, all right.
We'll get back to that.
So let's go to the 5.
>>FRANK: The 5's are
wonderful researchers.
They want to know the truth.
They want to go to the source.
They want to understand
life through their heads.
I have, oh, a friend who has--
a music researcher.
He has gone into
the instruments,
and the way that Bach,
when he wrote his music
with the kind of quill
and the lighting.
And he has the most
beautiful details
about how things are done.
5's love to figure out
how things are done.
And they often will--
I have it in the book, someone
with books behind them.
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>FRANK: Not all 5's or
studious are scholarly.
But our best scholars
are usually 5's.
A lot of my professors in
graduate school were probably
5's.
They'll take-- as the 4's take
a deep dive into emotions,
the 5's take a deep
dive into thoughts.
>>REGINA: Into knowledge.
>>FRANK: Into knowledge.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: They really are
so hungry for knowledge.
And they love having
intellectual debates.
I know some friends who are in
a group called The Philosophers,
and run by a
philosophy professor.
And they discuss
philosophy that way--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: --you know?
And it's a pastime.
And it's a passion.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And it works great.
The emotional side
for 5's, not so sure.
>>REGINA: Yeah, my son
sounds a bit like a 5.
In fact, he started
two philosophy clubs,
a Socrates Club in two different
colleges-- universities.
And--
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --he didn't
talk about his emotions.
>>FRANK: No, 5's--
>>REGINA: But he loved the
field of theory and ideas,
and a great researcher.
>>FRANK: Exactly,
5's are very private.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
very private, yeah.
>>FRANK: And they often
feel that other people
are kind of intrusive.
They want to know-- they
want to know how I feel?
Please, there's a
little barrier here
because they feel easily
overwhelmed by others,
especially by emotion.
And they want to go away and
think about how they feel.
And they want to
analyze it, you see.
I had a client for a number
of years who was a 5.
He came in with his wife through
an employee assistance program.
We had three sessions together.
And then she kind of
pinned a note to him,
and said, here, Frank.
You take care of
him now, in private.
So I saw him for
a couple of years.
Now, I found that he-- it
was very difficult for him
to really know what
to do in therapy.
>>REGINA: Because you have
to talk about your feelings.
>>FRANK: Yes, and so I would
say, how was your week?
Well, let me think
about what I did.
And he would go through
a list of things.
And he would tell me about an
argument he had with his wife,
and what she says.
I said, well, how
is that for you?
And he would just sit
there for a long time,
and have to think,
how was that for me?
He had to really go
deep to access that.
And also, it wasn't
like-- a 4, if they
came in, would be talking.
A 5 is kind of quiet.
And I learned to really
respect 5's need for privacy,
and understand that they need
to have that internal space
because they feel
there's so much they
have to think about and learn.
There's not much time for
anything else, or energy.
It's about energy.
They feel they have to
contain their energy.
>>REGINA: So maybe with fives
in relationship, oftentimes,
the partner feels they can't get
a deep connection emotionally.
>>FRANK: Very much so.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
And 6?
>>FRANK: 6's are--
it's a great point.
I'm with a 6.
>>REGINA: A 1 and a 6,
we'll talk about that later.
>>FRANK: Well, yeah,
that's a whole thing.
But 6's-- the 5, 6, and 7
are called to be fear-based,
and the mental types.
5's feel overwhelmed by
the world, the outer world.
So they go to the inner world.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: I'll skip ahead.
But 7's are kind of
afraid of the inner world.
So they play in the outer world.
The 6's are kind
of afraid of both.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: It's like, if I--
the world is not a safe place.
I don't know what
people are up to.
I can't really trust
what's going on.
I need to check things out.
I'm a little cynical.
But I'm careful.
And I'm watching out for
me and for my loved ones.
So they tend to be suspicious.
And not that they
want to go in, they
have a hard time being
certain about what
they think is really true, or
what they feel is really true.
So there's a lot of doubt
that goes on in the 6.
And 6's that were incredibly,
often, community-oriented,
they will take up the cause.
They will be protesters.
If something doesn't
feel right in the world,
they're going to make sure that
they do their part because it's
more like the we for the 6.
And they can be
very compassionate.
And really, right
there, the thing
that really distinguishes
6's is their loyalty.
And I feel it in my own life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: I mean, when someone
is a 6 and they're with you,
that's it.
>>REGINA: They're with you.
>>FRANK: There is nothing
coming between that.
And that's an incredible gift.
>>REGINA: So they're very
relationship, people-oriented.
>>FRANK: Very much so,
unless they get so phobic,
and they can't deal with people.
>>REGINA: You want
to know it's true--
and Howard Hughes, and
have Kleenex on your--
>>FRANK: Yes, that's probably--
>>REGINA: --Kleenex
boxes on their feet.
>>FRANK: --a very contracted 6.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, and 7's?
>>FRANK: 7's love life.
7's love to play.
7's love opportunities.
They love to
travel, or they just
love to have freshness, and
new things, and stimulation--
and especially in
the outer world.
You want your travel
agent to be a 7.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and so they
know where the good stuff is.
>>FRANK: I've gone
traveling-- not just--
but your travel guide.
They're going to just--
the best restaurants,
I'll show you this.
It's great.
And I love the 7 friends
that I have in my life.
And they will tend
to think about what
will make them happy.
And they just
assume that you will
go along being happy with
what they're happy with.
>>REGINA: Right, so a little
self-absorption, perhaps.
>>FRANK: It kind of sets in.
There's a tenet.
We all have it.
But the 7's-- because how could
you not enjoy what I'm doing?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Look at this.
>>REGINA: It's so cool.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: So 7's have
difficulty in relationship
because they tend to not be able
to easily go into where someone
else is, especially
if someone is sad
or if someone is having
not positive emotions.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: They just
kind of don't know
where to go because
7's, the fear
that they have of
the inside, what
would happen if I found out that
I'm not as happy as I think?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: What would
happen if I go in there
and it's difficult things?
And 7's will tend to make light
of situations that are heavy.
And they can be the comics
for us, which can really help.
But at a certain point,
you want to say, cool it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: Just be here
with what's going on.
>>REGINA: Yeah, even if it's
uncomfortable and painful.
Give them a hug.
Number 8?
>>FRANK: Number 8's are
full of great energy.
They're kind of
bigger than life.
Often, they're
actually big people.
I don't mean fat, but I mean,
just kind of big presence.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: And when
I've done panels,
which means you ask
people to come and talk
about being that type, and
there's rows set up, often,
the 8's will separate their
chairs from one another
because they want
their own territory.
And so 8's are very
much command people.
They will look at a
situation and assume
the commanding
position, whether or not
anyone asks them to do it.
I've worked with an 8 who
is a CEO of a company.
He was great because he
wants to get to business.
He doesn't want to
go through any BS.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And after a few
minutes of conversation,
OK, I think we're done.
Thank you very much.
And I just love that.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Because you
know where you stand.
And he would tell
you where you were.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Yeah, so
8's are great--
>>REGINA: He'll tell
you where you stand.
>>FRANK: Yes, tell you
where he was, and--
>>REGINA: And where you are.
>>FRANK: --wherever you are,
and where you need to be.
But there's this, oftentimes,
a gruffness about 8's.
They don't have much finesse.
They can be kind of bold, and--
>>REGINA: Bull in a china shop.
>>FRANK: --insensitive, yeah.
But when you get to
know them, oh my god,
they are the most
tender-hearted people.
And they are out to protect
the vulnerable in life.
And if they pick up that
you need their support,
they are there
completely for you.
I mean, you can't get
any better support
than from an 8, who will step
up and fight for you if need be.
>>REGINA: So if you're in
a relationship with an 8,
you'd find that it's
kind of-- you're
going to be assessed
quite a bit.
And you're going to be
told how things are going.
But on the other hand,
if you need them,
they're going to be there.
>>FRANK: Very much so.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: Yeah, I think
that's a good way to say it.
>>REGINA: OK, now we get to 9's.
>>FRANK: 9's-- 9's
have this, externally,
this most wonderful kind of
plastic demeanor oftentimes.
Most people just love 9's.
They're very easy to be
around because 9's, it's
kind of like a sea
anemone, or something
that's just kind of floating.
>>REGINA: Flows with things.
>>FRANK: And they
float with things.
And they don't really have a
lot of attention on themselves,
it looks like, because it--
and so the strength
and the weakness
is that they can go
along with people.
But then you don't know
really where they are,
or what they want.
And 9's often wake up--
let's say that you're
in a relationship with someone.
And they thought-- they would
call it merging with somebody.
That energy is, OK, I'll
just become that energy.
And they may wake up later
and say, how did I get here?
>>REGINA: Oh yeah.
>>FRANK: So they have a hard
time knowing their own needs
and desires.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And yet they're the
most wonderful mediators.
They know how to see
all points of view.
It's kind of-- it's at
the top of the Enneagram,
of the Triangle, of
the Inner Triangle.
So it's kind of like this
wonderful overview of people,
and a sense of accepting.
Like, everyone has a place.
We really could really use
a lot more 8's, you know?
But 9's have
difficulty sometimes
mobilizing themselves
or taking charge.
They can do it.
But it's not their most
natural place, you see.
So they really like
working in teams.
And they can say--
coordinate different
people working together.
And they're excellent at that.
>>REGINA: But they can
get lost in other people
and not know what
their needs are, not
know where they begin
and someone else ends?
>>FRANK: Right, yeah,
and you don't find out
until they get really
angry about something
you didn't know.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And they
don't know either.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: I'm sorry.
They-- I touched myself.
They don't know.
And so it can be hard
to know where a 9 is.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: So in partnership, you
have to kind of pull things out
of them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: And 9's feel that if
they express a strong opinion,
that might send you away
because what their focus really
is on connecting.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: They feel
essential to stay connected.
>>REGINA: Oh yeah.
>>FRANK: If I have a
disagreement and we disconnect,
I'm going to feel panicky.
>>REGINA: Right, right, OK.
So thank you so much.
You're so good at
explaining this.
Of course, I guess 40
years of practice helps.
But I would like to talk
just a little bit, then.
You mentioned a 1 and a 6, you
and your partner, a 1 and a 6.
And then talk about
a really easy sort
of combination or
match, if we're
looking at just kind of
classically, cliche, easy.
>>FRANK: The one that comes to
mind, this is a real classic,
is the 1, 7.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: You think about a
rule-based, wanting to do
things right, a little uptight.
Make sure that you don't
just loosely do something.
But think about it.
You want to be appropriate.
You want to act--
that's very important,
act appropriately A 7,
it's like, let's go.
And let's play.
Why are you so uptight?
I think there's plenty
of movies about this kind
of archetypal thing.
>>REGINA: Yes, oh yeah.
>>FRANK: Lighten up, would you?
The 7 will say to the 1.
And the 1 will say, why don't
you pull it in a little bit?
It's like you're
always out there.
And we have serious things
to do here, you know?
>>REGINA: So if
someone else would say,
wow, that seems like
pretty opposite, you'd say,
no, this is a good match.
>>FRANK: Well, the thing--
>>REGINA: Because they pull
something out of each other.
>>FRANK: You do.
And if you can take that, and--
but here's the secret.
You have to see that you have
that other person in you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: The one thing, and
I haven't read about this,
but I've observed
through the years
that oftentimes, people
are in partnerships
or significant relationships
with people who
they share the connecting line.
The 1 connects over to the 7.
Some say that, for the
1, is a heart space.
When I feel expanded,
I can go there.
For the 7's to come to the 1,
it's usually not too pretty
because they get critical.
But I have found that we
tend to attract people
who are connected to us
through these connecting lines
of the Enneagram.
And if you want to
use relationship
as a path for growth,
this can really work.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: Because it's your
shadow that's over there.
We're oftentimes drawn to the
person who is our own shadow.
And then we make them
wrong, as a 1 would.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: But we have to
learn to embrace that.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>FRANK: And the counterpoint
to the narrowness--
each type is fine.
There's nothing wrong.
It's just that it gets narrow.
And the Enneagram is
so brilliant in saying,
expand out.
You actually have all of these
other eight qualities in you.
>>REGINA: Right, you're
not just one thing.
It just might-- you might be the
dominantly express one thing.
>>FRANK: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Because
when you look at it,
it's often two or even
three dominant parts
that will come up.
And if you take
classic Enneagram
tests, which you can do online.
You can find one and
do a little Enneagram
test, and a bunch of questions.
And it overlays
pretty well with what
you would kind of self-identify
in your book, I noticed.
OK, let's talk about maybe a
more challenging combination,
classically.
>>FRANK: Yes, I
don't know-- well,
it's dramatic, if
not challenging.
I'm just thinking about
this, like, the 4 and 8.
They're both very intense.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: The 4 is very
intense with feelings
and inner feelings, and
having to be an individual.
And no one's really like me.
The 8, as you know, is kind of
a very strong, intense energy,
more outwardly directed.
I'm not sure.
But if you take a movie like
"Vicky Cristina Barcelona."
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: Javier Bardem
and Penelope Cruz?
>>REGINA: Yeah, boom.
>>FRANK: These explosions.
>>REGINA: Well, it
ended up in marriage--
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: --in real life.
>>FRANK: Yeah, but that to me, I
don't know if it's challenging.
But it is because
they really have
to monitor the intensity
since they both share that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>FRANK: It's kind of like their
overdone strains can really
take them down a certain path.
I think for challenging,
let's say a 2 and a 5.
The 2 wants to really--
>>REGINA: Help and please.
>>FRANK: Please, you know.
>>REGINA: And the 5 is
saying, like, I'm researching.
Don't bug me.
I don't want to think about it.
I don't want to feel that.
>>FRANK: OK, honey.
I'll leave you a cup of coffee.
And I'll leave you alone.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Yeah, so that could feel a
little dry, a little painful,
for the two.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that makes sense.
>>FRANK: And intrusive
on the 5's part.
>>REGINA: And
intrusive on the 5.
>>FRANK: And they
just keep trying
to get into their
own privacy more.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and so
you just-- they keep
pulling away from you, yeah.
So I did the little test
because I'm looking--
I love your book.
So I'm looking at it.
And my husband
and I both did it.
>>FRANK: OK.
>>REGINA: And so I
told you our numbers.
And you didn't even comment.
You just started laughing.
>>FRANK: Well, tell me
again because you said--
>>REGINA: OK, well,
what it was, what we
came up with in the test-- we
took an online test, right?
And we ended up where
I was like, a 7, 9, 2.
And he was a 4, 8, 1.
>>FRANK: OK.
>>REGINA: And you
started laughing.
>>FRANK: I laugh a
lot with this stuff.
Well, I have to think about why.
If I take your first one, 7?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: You think
you might be a 7.
>>REGINA: 7-- 7, 9,
one of the two-- both.
>>FRANK: 7 and 9.
>>REGINA: But it seemed
a little more 7 than 9.
>>FRANK: OK, and him,
the first one being?
>>REGINA: 4, 8.
>>FRANK: Oh, OK.
>>REGINA: Is that
why you laughed?
That intensity.
>>FRANK: --the 4.
Well, a 4, 8 is--
>>REGINA: So intense.
>>FRANK: Very intense.
>>REGINA: He's so
brilliant, but so intense.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: They're intense.
And especially for 7's
who want to keep things up
and light, 4's can really--
the 7's feel like, that 4
is really dragging me down.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it can
rain on your parade.
And the 4 is saying, can't
you just be where this is?
Can't you be where I
am with the suffering?
And life has suffering.
And it's like, suffering?
Why?
Can't we get over
that part faster?
>>FRANK: You got it.
You know this stuff.
>>REGINA: Oh yeah.
>>FRANK: That's
what would happen.
And so to grow
together, the 4 would
have to understand
that sometimes, it's
OK to just lighten up.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And enjoy.
>>FRANK: And they can.
And the 7 has to once in a
while say, OK, maybe life--
>>REGINA: I'll suffer with you.
>>FRANK: --is not always
going to be up and happy.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: And there's some
richness in what you have--
what you're holding here.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And I've seen 7's
begin to really appreciate
that because 4's can
help bring the 7 in.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: And 7's
generally need that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah,
and then the other part
was the 9 and then the 8.
And we both relate
strongly to those as well.
>>FRANK: Well, actually, very
good because those are wings,
meaning that--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: --if you are
a 7 with an 8 wing,
and he's a 9 with a--
or an 8 with a--
>>REGINA: He's a 4--
well, I don't know about wings.
But he just came
out dominant, 4, 8.
And I came out
dominant, 7 and 9.
>>FRANK: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so--
>>REGINA: And that squishy part,
just flowing and wanting to be
part of--
and flowing in with, and
saying, how did I get here,
I totally get that one.
You can't tell yourself from
someone else in the room--
>>FRANK: Right.
>>REGINA: --anyone in the room.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and
then his ability
to say, hey, this is how it is.
And I can handle it, the 8.
I know where everyone's
supposed to be--
take their place.
And it is interesting.
There's so much richness and so
much up and down to work with.
>>FRANK: Oh, it's just-- it's
a wonderful thing to watch.
And once you begin to know the
Enneagram more and integrated,
you begin to see
it all around you.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And it becomes
almost entertainment,
too because you're watching--
>>REGINA: Oh, I think so.
I love it.
>>FRANK: --people
do their things.
>>REGINA: Well, the thing
I like about your book
is that because it's
so approachable.
It's direct-- and because
you made it so essential when
you got down to the values of
each one, the characteristics,
and how to interact with them.
It was just so to the point.
>>FRANK: Good.
>>REGINA: That you could
use the book for people
who are unfamiliar with it.
>>FRANK: Yes.
>>REGINA: And you
could even have
fun at a dinner
party or whatever,
and play with these
parts so that you
start understanding
and seeing each other
in a whole different way.
>>FRANK: Even if you don't
know your type or someone's,
you at least go, I'm curious.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>FRANK: And that's
the opening door--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: --to say,
I'm curious now.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and just with
this innate understanding,
there's more compassion
if we can accept
that we're all different.
And here, you're going to
see we're all very different.
We come from a completely
different place
of what we need, desire,
want, and don't want.
>>FRANK: Yes, and
we all have things
we want to move towards and
things we want to avoid.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: I mean, I've
seen through the years
that people are very simple.
>>REGINA: We are.
We're amoeba.
We scootch away from
the uncomfortable.
And we're attracted to the
things that are sweet and nice.
>>FRANK: And everyone
is doing that.
>>REGINA: Everyone.
>>FRANK: But in their own way.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
That-- in fact, we used to joke
about that, about the amoeba
quality of life.
Or if it's uncomfortable, I
just start scootching away.
>>FRANK: Yeah, and so I
find that compassion really
helps because you want people to
be more in their expanded self.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And when you lead from
your heart, people feel it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And they relax.
And they're kind of
OK with who they are.
And they show more
of who they are.
And you meet.
And it's this meeting, human
to human is what I call it.
>>REGINA: It's fun if you
can just drop the defenses
and say, hey, we all
have our burdens.
And we all have our beauty.
So let's talk about it.
>>FRANK: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Any final thoughts?
This has been a
lovely conversation.
>>FRANK: I want to just say that
earlier, that the kindness is
just the medicine.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: And I find
the Enneagram--
you asked about the
world and so forth.
This is great medicine.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>FRANK: I tried to make
the medicine go down
a little easier with my book.
>>REGINA: Oh, you
have a lot of sugar
in there, that beautiful
artwork and the distillation.
>>FRANK: Yeah, I love the--
Nancy, who did my artwork--
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
>>FRANK: --I am so grateful.
But it's-- I just find it gives
me a place to sit in life where
I can appreciate people.
There are people who
still really bother me.
And there are
people who, I just--
>>REGINA: But you're a 1.
They'll always bother you.
>>FRANK: Oh, you can
just turn the wrong way.
And I'm angry at you, you know?
But it's a practice, then.
So I'm not saying,
go and be nice.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: I'm just saying, do
the practice of kindness, which
means, how do I
allow myself to see
if I can understand life from
another person's point of view?
I may not like it.
But I can at least
see what it is,
and see in my own human self if
I have that same place in me.
>>REGINA: That's the
beauty of the Enneagram.
Thank you so much for
writing this beautiful book.
>>FRANK: Thank you very much.
I appreciate it, Regina.
>>REGINA: Again, Frank's book
is titled: "A Field Guide
to Humans: Using the Enneagram
to Improve Your Relationships,"
which you can find through
major booksellers--
such a sweet and
personal reading.
It allows us to be kinder, as
we just talked about, and more
understanding with one another.
And we're all in our
beautiful and unique journey.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]